README.md, before:

# FMOD Studio integration for Godot (WIP)

A Godot C++ module that provides an integration and GDScript bindings for the FMOD Studio API.

FMOD is an audio engine and middleware solution for interactive audio in games. It has been the audio engine behind many titles such as Transistor, Pyre and Celeste. [More on FMOD's website](https://www.fmod.com/).

This module exposes most of the Studio API functions to Godot's GDScript and also provides helpers for performing common functions like attaching Studio events to Godot nodes and playing 3D/positional audio. _It is still very much a work in progress and some API functions are not yet exposed._ Feel free to tweak/extend it based on your project's needs.

**Note:** FMOD provides a C# wrapper for their API which is used in the Unity integration and it is possible to use the same wrapper to build an integration for Godot in C#. However do note that this would only work on a Mono build of Godot and performance might not be on the same level as a C++ integration. 

## Installing the module

1. [Download the FMOD Studio API](https://www.fmod.com/download) (You need to create an account) and install it on your system. This integration currently uses the 2.00.00 Early Access release.
2. Clone the latest version of Godot from the [master branch](https://github.com/godotengine/godot). At the time of writing this is Godot 3.1 beta.
3. `cd` into the source directory and add the FMOD integration as a submodule into the `modules` directory `git submodule add https://github.com/alexfonseka/godot-fmod-integration modules/fmod`.
4. Copy the contents of the `api` directory of the FMOD API into the module's `api` directory `modules/fmod/api`. On Windows this is (usually) found at `C:/Program Files (x86)/FMOD SoundSystem/FMOD Studio API Windows/api`.
5. Recompile the engine. For more information on compiling the engine, refer to the [Godot documentation](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/latest/development/compiling/index.html).
6. Place the FMOD library files within the `bin` directory for Godot to start. Eg. on Windows these would be `fmod64.dll` and `fmodstudio64.dll` for a 64-bit build of Godot.

FMOD should now be integrated. If you are tweaking/extending the module it is faster to compile it as a dynamic library instead of a static library. Refer to the Godot documentation for more details on this.

### Android subtility

In order to get fmod working on android, you need to make Fmod java static initialization in godot's android export
template. To do so, follow the next steps :

- Add fmod.jar as dependency in your project.
In order to add fmod to gradle you should have dependencies looking like this :  
```
dependencies {
	implementation "com.android.support:support-core-utils:28.0.0"
	compile files("libs/fmod.jar")
}
```
- Modify `onCreate` and `onDestroy` methods in `Godot` java class  

For `onCreate` you should initialize java part of fmod. You should have something like this :  
```java
	@Override
	protected void onCreate(Bundle icicle) {

		super.onCreate(icicle);
		FMOD.init(this);
		Window window = getWindow();
		...
	}
```

For `onDestroy` method, you should close java part of Fmod. It should looks like this :
```java
	@Override
	protected void onDestroy() {

		if (mPaymentsManager != null) mPaymentsManager.destroy();
		for (int i = 0; i < singleton_count; i++) {
			singletons[i].onMainDestroy();
		}
		FMOD.close();
		super.onDestroy();
	}
```

- Then run `./gradlew build` to generate an apk export template. You can then use it in your project to get FMOD working
on android.

## Using the module

### Basic usage

```gdscript
extends Node

# create an instance of the module
# ideally this has to be done in an AutoLoad script
# as that way you'll be able to call FMOD functions from any script
# refer to the demo project provided
var FMOD = Fmod.new()

func _ready():
	# set up FMOD
	FMOD.system_set_software_format(0, Fmod.FMOD_SPEAKERMODE_STEREO, 0)
	# initializing with the LIVE_UPDATE flag lets you
	# connect to Godot from the FMOD Studio editor
	# and author events in realtime
	FMOD.system_init(1024, Fmod.FMOD_STUDIO_INIT_LIVEUPDATE, Fmod.FMOD_INIT_NORMAL)

	# load banks
	# place your banks inside the project directory
	FMOD.bank_load("./Banks/Desktop/Master Bank.bank", Fmod.FMOD_STUDIO_LOAD_BANK_NORMAL)
	FMOD.bank_load("./Banks/Desktop/Master Bank.strings.bank", Fmod.FMOD_STUDIO_LOAD_BANK_NORMAL)

	# register listener
	FMOD.system_add_listener($Listener)

	# play some events
	# technically these are not one-shots but this is just for demo's sake
	FMOD.play_one_shot("event:/Car engine", $SoundSource1)
	FMOD.play_one_shot("event:/Waterfall", $SoundSource2)

func _process(delta):
	# update FMOD every tick
	# calling system_update also updates the listener 3D position
	# and 3D positions of any attached event instances
	FMOD.system_update()
```

### Calling Studio events

Following is an example of an event instance called manually (ie. not directly managed by the integration). These instances are identified by a unique ID in the form of a string that you must generate in script ideally through a UUID generator. You could write one yourself or use something like [UUID for Godot](https://github.com/binogure-studio/godot-uuid). Note that the string could be anything as long as it is unique within the current instance pool. Remember to release the instance once you're done with it.

```gdscript
# unique identifier used to id your event instance
# throughout its lifecycle
var my_music_event = UUID.new()

# create an event instance associated with the unique identifier
# this is a music event that has been authored in the Studio editor
FMOD.event_create_instance(my_music_event, "event:/Waveshaper - Wisdom of Rage")

# start the event
FMOD.event_start(my_music_event)

# wait a bit
yield(music_state_timer, "timeout")

# setting an event parameter
# in this case causes the music to transition to the next phase
FMOD.event_set_parameter(my_music_event, "State", 2.0)

# wait a bit
yield(music_timer, "timeout")

# stop the event
FMOD.event_stop(my_music_event, Fmod.FMOD_STUDIO_STOP_ALLOWFADEOUT)

# release the event
FMOD.event_release(my_music_event)
```

### Using the integration helpers

These are helper functions provided by the integration for attaching event instances to Godot Nodes for 3D/positional audio. The listener position and 3D attributes of any attached instances are automatically updated every time you call `system_update()`. Instances are also automatically cleaned up once finished so you don't have to manually call `event_release()`.

```gdscript
# play an event at this Node's position
# 3D attributes are only set ONCE
# parameters cannot be set
FMOD.play_one_shot("event:/Footstep", self)

# same as play_one_shot but lets you set initial parameters
# subsequent parameters cannot be set
FMOD.play_one_shot_with_params("event:/Footstep", self, { "Surface": 1.0, "Speed": 2.0 })

# play an event attached to this Node
# 3D attributes are automatically set every frame (when update is called)
# parameters cannot be set
FMOD.play_one_shot_attached("event:/Footstep", self)

# same as play_one_shot_attached but lets you set initial parameters
# subsequent parameters cannot be set
FMOD.play_one_shot_attached_with_params("event:/Footstep", self, { "Surface": 1.0, "Speed": 2.0 })

# attaches a manually called instance to a Node
# once attached 3D attributes are automatically set every frame (when update is called)
FMOD.attach_instance_to_node(uuid, self)

# detaches the instance from its Node
FMOD.detach_instance_from_node(uuid)
```

### Playing sounds using FMOD Core / Low Level API

You can load and play any sound file in your project directory by using the FMOD Low Level API bindings. Similar to Studio Events these instances are identified by a UUID generated in script. Any instances you create must be released manually. Refer to FMOD's documentation pages for a list of compatible sound formats.

```gdscript
# note that this function returns the UUID back to you as its return value
var my_sound = FMOD.sound_load(UUID.new(), "./ta-da.wav", Fmod.FMOD_DEFAULT)

FMOD.sound_play(my_sound)

# wait a bit
yield(sound_timer, "timeout")

FMOD.sound_stop(my_sound)
FMOD.sound_release(my_sound)
```

## Issues

This project is still a work in progress and is probably not yet ready for use in full-blown production. If you run into issues (crashes, memory leaks, broken 3D sound etc.) open a issue or submit a PR with your fix.

Commit message:

AndroidBuild : add environment variable for ndk instruction in readme

README.md, after:

# FMOD Studio integration for Godot (WIP)

A Godot C++ module that provides an integration and GDScript bindings for the FMOD Studio API.

FMOD is an audio engine and middleware solution for interactive audio in games. It has been the audio engine behind many titles such as Transistor, Pyre and Celeste. [More on FMOD's website](https://www.fmod.com/).

This module exposes most of the Studio API functions to Godot's GDScript and also provides helpers for performing common functions like attaching Studio events to Godot nodes and playing 3D/positional audio. _It is still very much a work in progress and some API functions are not yet exposed._ Feel free to tweak/extend it based on your project's needs.

**Note:** FMOD provides a C# wrapper for their API which is used in the Unity integration and it is possible to use the same wrapper to build an integration for Godot in C#. However do note that this would only work on a Mono build of Godot and performance might not be on the same level as a C++ integration. 

## Installing the module

1. [Download the FMOD Studio API](https://www.fmod.com/download) (You need to create an account) and install it on your system. This integration currently uses the 2.00.00 Early Access release.
2. Clone the latest version of Godot from the [master branch](https://github.com/godotengine/godot). At the time of writing this is Godot 3.1 beta.
3. `cd` into the source directory and add the FMOD integration as a submodule into the `modules` directory `git submodule add https://github.com/alexfonseka/godot-fmod-integration modules/fmod`.
4. Copy the contents of the `api` directory of the FMOD API into the module's `api` directory `modules/fmod/api`. On Windows this is (usually) found at `C:/Program Files (x86)/FMOD SoundSystem/FMOD Studio API Windows/api`.
5. Recompile the engine. For more information on compiling the engine, refer to the [Godot documentation](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/latest/development/compiling/index.html).
6. Place the FMOD library files within the `bin` directory for Godot to start. Eg. on Windows these would be `fmod64.dll` and `fmodstudio64.dll` for a 64-bit build of Godot.

FMOD should now be integrated. If you are tweaking/extending the module it is faster to compile it as a dynamic library instead of a static library. Refer to the Godot documentation for more details on this.

### Android subtility

Before building the engine, you should first create the environment variable to get the NDK path.

`export ANDROID_NDK_ROOT=pathToYourNDK`

In order to get fmod working on android, you need to make Fmod java static initialization in godot's android export
template. To do so, follow the next steps :

- Add fmod.jar as dependency in your project.
In order to add fmod to gradle you should have dependencies looking like this :  
```
dependencies {
	implementation "com.android.support:support-core-utils:28.0.0"
	compile files("libs/fmod.jar")
}
```
- Modify `onCreate` and `onDestroy` methods in `Godot` java class  

For `onCreate` you should initialize java part of fmod. You should have something like this :  
```java
	@Override
	protected void onCreate(Bundle icicle) {

		super.onCreate(icicle);
		FMOD.init(this);
		Window window = getWindow();
		...
	}
```

For `onDestroy` method, you should close java part of Fmod. It should looks like this :
```java
	@Override
	protected void onDestroy() {

		if (mPaymentsManager != null) mPaymentsManager.destroy();
		for (int i = 0; i < singleton_count; i++) {
			singletons[i].onMainDestroy();
		}
		FMOD.close();
		super.onDestroy();
	}
```

- Then run `./gradlew build` to generate an apk export template. You can then use it in your project to get FMOD working
on android.

## Using the module

### Basic usage

```gdscript
extends Node

# create an instance of the module
# ideally this has to be done in an AutoLoad script
# as that way you'll be able to call FMOD functions from any script
# refer to the demo project provided
var FMOD = Fmod.new()

func _ready():
	# set up FMOD
	FMOD.system_set_software_format(0, Fmod.FMOD_SPEAKERMODE_STEREO, 0)
	# initializing with the LIVE_UPDATE flag lets you
	# connect to Godot from the FMOD Studio editor
	# and author events in realtime
	FMOD.system_init(1024, Fmod.FMOD_STUDIO_INIT_LIVEUPDATE, Fmod.FMOD_INIT_NORMAL)

	# load banks
	# place your banks inside the project directory
	FMOD.bank_load("./Banks/Desktop/Master Bank.bank", Fmod.FMOD_STUDIO_LOAD_BANK_NORMAL)
	FMOD.bank_load("./Banks/Desktop/Master Bank.strings.bank", Fmod.FMOD_STUDIO_LOAD_BANK_NORMAL)

	# register listener
	FMOD.system_add_listener($Listener)

	# play some events
	# technically these are not one-shots but this is just for demo's sake
	FMOD.play_one_shot("event:/Car engine", $SoundSource1)
	FMOD.play_one_shot("event:/Waterfall", $SoundSource2)

func _process(delta):
	# update FMOD every tick
	# calling system_update also updates the listener 3D position
	# and 3D positions of any attached event instances
	FMOD.system_update()
```

### Calling Studio events

Following is an example of an event instance called manually (ie. not directly managed by the integration). These instances are identified by a unique ID in the form of a string that you must generate in script ideally through a UUID generator. You could write one yourself or use something like [UUID for Godot](https://github.com/binogure-studio/godot-uuid). Note that the string could be anything as long as it is unique within the current instance pool. Remember to release the instance once you're done with it.

```gdscript
# unique identifier used to id your event instance
# throughout its lifecycle
var my_music_event = UUID.new()

# create an event instance associated with the unique identifier
# this is a music event that has been authored in the Studio editor
FMOD.event_create_instance(my_music_event, "event:/Waveshaper - Wisdom of Rage")

# start the event
FMOD.event_start(my_music_event)

# wait a bit
yield(music_state_timer, "timeout")

# setting an event parameter
# in this case causes the music to transition to the next phase
FMOD.event_set_parameter(my_music_event, "State", 2.0)

# wait a bit
yield(music_timer, "timeout")

# stop the event
FMOD.event_stop(my_music_event, Fmod.FMOD_STUDIO_STOP_ALLOWFADEOUT)

# release the event
FMOD.event_release(my_music_event)
```

### Using the integration helpers

These are helper functions provided by the integration for attaching event instances to Godot Nodes for 3D/positional audio. The listener position and 3D attributes of any attached instances are automatically updated every time you call `system_update()`. Instances are also automatically cleaned up once finished so you don't have to manually call `event_release()`.

```gdscript
# play an event at this Node's position
# 3D attributes are only set ONCE
# parameters cannot be set
FMOD.play_one_shot("event:/Footstep", self)

# same as play_one_shot but lets you set initial parameters
# subsequent parameters cannot be set
FMOD.play_one_shot_with_params("event:/Footstep", self, { "Surface": 1.0, "Speed": 2.0 })

# play an event attached to this Node
# 3D attributes are automatically set every frame (when update is called)
# parameters cannot be set
FMOD.play_one_shot_attached("event:/Footstep", self)

# same as play_one_shot_attached but lets you set initial parameters
# subsequent parameters cannot be set
FMOD.play_one_shot_attached_with_params("event:/Footstep", self, { "Surface": 1.0, "Speed": 2.0 })

# attaches a manually called instance to a Node
# once attached 3D attributes are automatically set every frame (when update is called)
FMOD.attach_instance_to_node(uuid, self)

# detaches the instance from its Node
FMOD.detach_instance_from_node(uuid)
```

### Playing sounds using FMOD Core / Low Level API

You can load and play any sound file in your project directory by using the FMOD Low Level API bindings. Similar to Studio Events these instances are identified by a UUID generated in script. Any instances you create must be released manually. Refer to FMOD's documentation pages for a list of compatible sound formats.

```gdscript
# note that this function returns the UUID back to you as its return value
var my_sound = FMOD.sound_load(UUID.new(), "./ta-da.wav", Fmod.FMOD_DEFAULT)

FMOD.sound_play(my_sound)

# wait a bit
yield(sound_timer, "timeout")

FMOD.sound_stop(my_sound)
FMOD.sound_release(my_sound)
```

## Issues

This project is still a work in progress and is probably not yet ready for use in full-blown production. If you run into issues (crashes, memory leaks, broken 3D sound etc.) open a issue or submit a PR with your fix.
